 vehicle inspection methods 
including: 
a. pre-work 
b. post-work
c. pre-delivery
d. maintenance 
e. pre-MOT 
f. safety inspection
1.3 explain how to find interpret and use sources of technical information for scheduled 
maintenance activities
1.4 describe the importance of using the correct sources of technical information, including 
identification codes
1.5 identify how vehicle systems operate and the operational tolerances for the vehicle(s) 
on which you are working, including: 
a. engine area
b. transmission area
c. chassis / frame area
95
City & Guilds 
d. electrical area
1.6 identify the procedures involved in carrying out a logical and systematic inspection 
using prescribed inspection methods 
1.7 identify the conformity of vehicle systems on light vehicles inspections 
1.8 compare test and inspection results against light vehicle specification and legal 
requirements 
1.9 describe the importance of making accurate records of the results of tests and 
inspections and interpreting them correctly
1.10 explain how to record and complete inspection and test results in the format required 
1.11 identify how to make recommendations based upon the results of your inspections
1.12 explain the implications of failing to carry out light vehicle inspections activities 
correctly 
1.13 describe the importance of work-based policies for the following:
a. vehicle inspection activities
b. working to agreed timescales and keeping others informed of progress
c. the relationship between time and costs and productivity 
d. reporting anticipated delays to the relevant person(s) promptly
1.14 explain the implications of signing workplace documentation and vehicle records 
Including use of different types of formats in which records may be stored 
1.15 explain the procedure for recognising and reporting cosmetic damage to light vehicle 
components and units outside normal inspection items.
96
City & Guilds 
Unit 155 Knowledge of Inspecting Light Vehicles 
Using Prescribed Methods
Supporting information
Candidates will be assessed on the assessment criteria as specified within the unit and 
the following supporting information is included to support centres in terms of 
teaching and delivery.
Knowledge to include pre and post work vehicle inspections and record findings to include 
Hybrid/electrical and alternative fuel vehicles.
a. Personal protective equipment (PPE) 
b. Vehicle protective equipment (VPE) relating to:
i. vehicle body panels
ii. paint surfaces
iii. seats
iv. carpets and floor mats prior to conduction vehicle inspections.
c. Prepare and use appropriate inspection equipment and tools.
d. Inspection procedures following inspection checklists.
e. Pre and post work vehicle inspection procedures.
 Aural, visual and functional assessments on:
i. engine systems
ii. chassis systems
iii. wheels and tyres
iv. transmission system
v. electrical and electronic systems
vi. exterior vehicle body
vii. vehicle interior.
f. The methods for carrying out inspections for: damage, corrosion, fluid leaks, wear, security 
and condition to include:
i. engine systems
ii. chassis systems
iii. transmission systems
iv. brakes
v. steering
vi. suspension
vii. wheels
viii. tyres
ix. body panels and vehicle exterior
x. electrical and electronic systems and components
xi. vehicle seating and vehicle interior
xii. vehicle instrumentation
xiii. driver controls.
g. Check conformity to manufacturer’s specifications and legal requirements.
97
City & Guilds 
h. Comply with manufacturer's recommended work times, job times set by your company or a 
job time agreed with a specific customer.
i. Completion of documentation to include:
i. inspection records
ii. job cards
iii. vehicle records.
j. Make recommendations based on results of vehicle inspections.
k. The checks necessary to ensure customer satisfaction for:
i. cleanliness of vehicle interior and exterior
ii. documentation completed prior to handover to customer (electronic/written)
iii. explanation to customer of additional work required on completion (if applicable).
